.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" This documentation was written by Mark Johnston under sponsorship from
.\" the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2021
.Dt KMSAN 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm KMSAN
.Nd Kernel Memory SANitizer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
The
.Pa GENERIC-KMSAN
kernel configuration can be used to compile a KMSAN-enabled kernel using
.Pa GENERIC
as a base configuration.
Alternately, to compile KMSAN into the kernel, place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options KMSAN"
.Ed
.Pp
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_mark "const void *addr" "size_t size" "uint8_t code"
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_orig "const void *addr" "size_t size" "int type" "uintptr_t pc"
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_check "const void *addr" "size_t size" "const char *descr"
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_check_bio "const struct bio *" "const char *descr"
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_check_ccb "const union ccb *" "const char *descr"
.Ft void
.Fn kmsan_check_mbuf "const struct mbuf *" "const char *descr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a subsystem which leverages compiler instrumentation to detect uses of
uninitialized memory in the kernel.
Currently it is implemented only on the amd64 platform.
.Pp
When
.Nm
is compiled into the kernel, the compiler is configured to emit function
calls preceding memory accesses.
The functions are implemented by the
.Nm
runtime component and use hidden, byte-granular shadow state to determine
whether the source operand has been initialized.
When uninitialized memory is used as a source operand in certain operations,
such as control flow expressions or pointer dereferences, the runtime reports
an error.
Otherwise, the shadow state is propagated to destination operand.
For example, a
variable assignment or a
.Fn memcpy
call which copies uninitialized memory will cause the destination buffer or
variable to be marked uninitialized.
.Pp
In addition to compiler-detected uses of uninitialized memory,
various kernel I/O
.Dq exit points ,
such as
.Xr copyout 9 ,
are overridden to validate the input's shadow state and will raise an error if
any uninitialized bytes are detected.
.Pp
The
.Nm
option imposes a significant performance penalty.
Kernel code typically runs two or three times slower, and each byte mapped in
the kernel map requires two bytes of shadow state.
As a result,
.Nm
should be used only for kernel testing and development.
It is not recommended to enable
.Nm
in systems with less than 8GB of physical RAM.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Nm
runtime makes use of two shadows of the kernel map.
Each address in the kernel map has a linear mapping to addresses in the
two shadows.
The first, simply called the shadow map, tracks the state of the corresponding
kernel memory.
A non-zero byte in the shadow indicates that the corresponding byte of kernel
memory is uninitialized.
The
.Nm
instrumentation automatically propagates shadow state as the contents of kernel
memory are transformed and copied.
The second shadow is called the origin map, and exists only to help debug
reports from the sanitizer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr copyout 9 ,
.Xr KASAN 9
.Rs
.%A Evgeniy Stepanov
.%A Konstantin Serebryany
.%T MemorySanitizer: fast detector of uninitialized memory use in C++
.%J 2015 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO)
.%D 2015
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was ported from
.Nx
and first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh BUGS
Accesses to kernel memory outside of the kernel map are ignored by the
.Nm
runtime.
In particular, memory accesses via the direct map are not validated.
When memory is copied from outside the kernel map into the kernel map,
it is marked as initialized.
This is a conservative policy that aims to avoid raising false positives,
but it may mask bugs.
.Nm
On amd64, global variables and the physical page array
.Va vm_page_array
are not sanitized.
This is intentional, as it reduces memory usage by avoiding creating
shadows of large regions of the kernel map.
However, this can allow bugs to go undetected.
